Desperate Ward
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: Personal
Target: One spell
Duration: Instantaneous
Magic Attack Roll: None required
This form of defensive blast only works against sorcery
and can only be invoked when a hostile spell targets the
sorcerer. Roll 1d6 for every Power Point expended and
add the total of these rolls as a circumstance bonus to the
caster’s Saving Throw against the incoming spell.
Greater Warding
Power Point Cost: 4
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Touch
Target: One spell or creature
Duration: Instantaneous, up to one hour plus one hour/
level or until used, depending on version chosen.
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 10 ranks, warding.
Magic Attack Roll: Opposes opponent’s magic attack roll
Greater warding has two modes of use.
The first acts like a warding spell that can be cast on
another creature, immediately countering any spell or
spells affecting it if the sorcerer can succeed at a magic
attack roll opposing the magic attack roll of the sorcerer
who originally cast the spell.
The second use acts like a one-use warding spell that can
be transferred to another creature. Unlike warding and the
first use of greater warding, it may be cast in advance, in
which case it comes into effect as soon as another sorcerer
attempts to cast a spell on the subject. After one
use, it stops working.
Material Component: Paints and oils worth 50 silver pieces
with which to inscribe protective runes on the subject.
Incantation of
Amalric’s Witchman
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft. per two levels)
Target: One creature
Duration: Mortal
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 4 ranks, warding.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
This spell renders any god or demon who has taken on
humanoid form to walk the earth partially human, with all
the vulnerabilities of any other human. That is, any innate
damage reduction it may have had is lost, as is any immunity
to critical hits, sneak attacks and other attack forms. If the
god or demon had any particular vulnerabilities, however,
these are unaffected.
Rune of Jhebbal Sag
Power Point Cost: 3
Components: S, M
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Touch
Target: Any worshippers of Jhebbal Sag who come within
25 feet + 5 feet/level of the rune
Duration: Mortal
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Wis 13, Knowledge (arcana) 4 ranks,
Knowledge (religion) 6 ranks, warding.
The rune of Jhebbal Sag, when inscribed or
painted onto any surface, lets any worshippers
of Jhebbal Sag (see Chapter 12: Religion) know
that the sorcerer is friendly. Its most notable
effect is to release the subject or subjects of a
summon beast spell as soon as they come within
range. However, all animals remember their god
Jhebbal Sag and will become calm and nonaggressive
if they come within range. Likewise,
if any human or other intelligent worshippers
of the god come within range, the sorcerer
gains a +2 circumstance bonus to all
Charisma-based skill checks regarding
them. In effect, he is demonstrating
an allegiance to Jhebbal Sag, though
this allegiance need
not be genuine.
242
Sorcery
Ward Dwelling
Power Point Cost: 2+
Components: S, M
Casting Time: One hour per Power Point
Range: Touch
Target: One dwelling
Duration: One month
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 4 ranks, warding.
Magic Attack Roll: Opposes opponent’s magic attack roll
This spell protects a structure from evil magic. Two Power
Points must be expended to shield a small hut or cave from
evil magic; four points would suffice for the average house,
six for a large mansion, while a Stygian palace might require
10 or more Power Points. If anyone tries to cast a spell on
a target inside the warded dwelling, or if a summoned or
ensorcelled creature tries to enter the dwelling, the ward is
triggered (as per greater warding). Each ward dwelling spell
only works once, whether or not it blocks the hostile spell
but a building can be protected by multiple wards.
The caster of the spell knows when his ward dwelling spell
is triggered.
To cast ward dwelling, various arcane marks and runes must
be carved into the threshold and pillars of the building. It
is possible to ‘disarm’ a spell by removing the right marks
(Knowledge (arcana) DC 15 to identify them).
Material Component: Paints and gem dusts worth 100 silver
pieces per Power Point with which to inscribe protective
runes on the subject.
Ward by Will
Power Point Cost: One Power Point per 2 damage
reduction per round
Components: S
Casting Time: Free
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: One round
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 7 ranks, warding.
This spell is a ward against physical blows. The
caster gains two points of damage reduction for
every Power Point expended on the spell.
Armour Piercing rules work
normally.
Curses
Sorcerers are feared most of all not for the dark powers
with whom they traffic or the strange artefacts they create
but for what they can do to ordinary folk: curse them in a
variety of cruel and horrid ways.
Any character who is under the effects of a curse that does
not have immediately obvious physical effects may attempt
a Knowledge (arcana) check (DC 10 + level of the sorcerer
who cast the spell) to determine that he is affected by a
curse. If he succeeds by at least 20, he can also determine
the precise nature of the curse and the name of the sorcerer
who cast it.
Lesser Ill-Fortune
(Basic Curse)
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye, Touch or Magical Link
Target: One creature
Duration: One day
Saving Throw: Will negates
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
A sorcerer places a curse on a victim. The victim suffers a
–1 enhancement penalty to all attack rolls, saving throws,
ability checks and skill checks. This is not cumulative with
the effects of greater ill-fortune or ill-fortune − only the
most severe penalty applies.
Weapon Curse
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: One round
Saving Throw: None
Roll 1d6 for every Power Point expended when this spell
is cast and note the total of these rolls. Whenever the
caster takes damage from a weapon, the attacker takes the
damage instead. For example, if a sorcerer is struck by a
sword for 12 points of damage, the attacker takes 12 points
of damage instead of the sorcerer. This effect persists for
one round or until the total of the points roll is exhausted.
Weapon curse only applies to damage taken from weapons,
243
Sorcery
spells and other direct attacks – a sorcerer could not use the
weapon curse if he was trapped in a cave-in, for instance.
Awful Rite of the
Were-Beast
Power Point Cost: 8
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: Five minutes
Range: Touch
Target: One creature
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Will negates and see below
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +6, lesser ill-fortune.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
This dire ritual permanently changes a human into a werecreature
of a variety chosen by the sorcerer (see page 391).
The target may attempt a Will saving throw to completely
negate the effects.
If the sorcerer has the Ritual Sacrifice feat, he gains Power
Points as though he had sacrificed the target of the spell,
assuming the target fails his save and becomes a werecreature.
The magical energy released by this horrific
transformation is at least as great as that released by killing
the target outright.
The creature altered in this way is at least partially under the
thrall of the sorcerer and will attempt to remain within 500
feet of the sorcerer at all times. However, any time
the sorcerer gives the target a direct order he must make
a magic attack roll against the target’s Will saving throw
to compel him to obey. If the target succeeds in saving,
he is temporarily released from the sorcerer’s command for
1d6 rounds, after which time he may attempt another Will
saving throw. Success on this save means he is permanently
released, though he is still a were-creature; failure means
he is once more under the sorcerer’s thrall. At any time,
the sorcerer can elect to permanently release the creature
from his control, though he cannot reverse the spell.
Most sorcerers thus use this spell to create guards or just
cause mischief, rather than in the hope of creating a
legion of permanent servants; the risk of losing control
is just too great and few were-creatures created by
this spell will hold back if they get a chance to
attack their erstwhile masters. However, for
the sorcerer who rarely calls on his creations
to carry out a direct order, were-creatures
can make useful escorts or guards, perhaps for
many years.
Material Component: Various rare essences
and herbs to a value of 100 silver pieces.
244
Sorcery
Curse of Yizil
Power Point Cost: 2+ points (see below)
Components: V
Casting Time: Free action
Range: Evil Eye, Touch or Magical Link
Target: One creature
Duration: One day
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +4, lesser ill-fortune,
warding.
This spell is a dying curse, used by a sorcerer to weaken a
rival. It may only be cast by a character who has between
–1 and –9 hit points (inclusive) but it may be cast even if
that character would usually be unconscious and unable
to act – he manages, somehow, to use the last of his fading
willpower to cast the spell. Immediately upon casting the
spell, he dies, Fate Points notwithstanding.
The target of the spell suffers an enhancement penalty
to his magic attack rolls equal to one-half the number
of Power Points the sorcerer had left on casting the
spell, rounded down. However, the curse of Yizil is so
subtle that in most cases the sorcerer will have no idea
it is affecting him.
Special Note: Any sorcerer who meets the prerequisites
for this spell automatically knows it, without needing
to select it with either the New Spell class feature or the
Sorcerer’s Boon feat.
Dance of the
Changing Serpent
Power Point Cost: 5 points
Components: V, S, M, F
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One creature
Duration: Instantaneous, but see below
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Must be a Pict, magic attack bonus +4,
lesser ill-fortune.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for targets’ saving
throws
This spell places a man’s soul
in a ghost snake’s body and
vice versa. However, unlike
such spells as awful rite of
the were-beast, the
transposed
souls are highly disorientated and have no insight into the
correct way to control their new bodies. Both are regarded
as helpless in all respects and if left alone will eventually
die of starvation as they cannot even feed themselves. Both
creatures get Will saving throws and if at least one of them
succeeds, the spell fails.
If the sorcerer has the Ritual Sacrifice feat, he gains Power
Points as though he had sacrificed the target of the spell,
assuming the target fails his saving throw and changes souls
with the great serpent. The magical energy released by this
horrific swapping of essences is at least as great as that
released by killing the target outright.
It is common among the Picts to immediately sacrifice both
snake and man once it is clear the spell has worked. If this
is done using the Ritual Sacrifice feat, the sorcerer gains
Power Points as usual for the sacrifice. He also gains an
enhancement bonus of +4 on all Intimidate checks against
anyone who witnesses the whole ceremony. Furthermore,
he gains a +1 enhancement bonus to all magic attack rolls
due to the favour of his gods. These bonuses last for one
day per scholar or temptress level.
Material Components: Smoke-powders worth at least
50 silver pieces, plus one ghost snake (see page 373). If
desired, this can have been summoned by means of a
summon beast spell.
Focus: A bonfire at least five feet by five feet in size.
Again Balthus recognized the monster from ancient legends.
He saw and knew the ancient and evil serpent which swayed
there, its wedge-shaped head, huge as that of a horse, as
high as a tall man’s head, and its palely gleaming barrel
rippling out behind it. A forked tongue darted in and out,
and the firelight glittered on bared fangs.
Balthus became incapable of emotion. The horror of his
fate paralyzed him. That was the reptile that the ancients
called Ghost Snake, the pale, abominable terror that of old
glided into huts by night to devour whole families. Like the
python it crushed its victim, but unlike other constrictors
its fangs bore venom that carried madness and death. It
too had long been considered extinct.
– Beyond the Black River
245
Sorcery
Doom
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One creature
Duration: One round/level
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +2, lesser ill-fortune.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
The target must make an immediate Will saving throw or
be unable to use Fate Points for the duration of the spell.
Draw Forth the Soul
Power Point Cost: 20 for the first hour, 10 per hour
thereafter
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One day
Range: Magical Link
Target: One creature
Duration: Up to one hour/level
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Ritual Sacrifice, Tormented Sacrifice, magic
attack bonus +7, lesser ill-fortune.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
Draw forth the soul pulls forth the very soul from a single
target, an agonising and maddening process that can take
several hours.
The victim makes a Will saving throw. If he succeeds,
he is able to partially resist the effects of the spell – he
is helpless for the next hour, though he is still able to
speak in a somewhat rambling and pained manner. If he
succeeds by 10 or more, he completely throws off the spell
and the sorcerer may not attempt to cast it on him again
for at least one day. If he fails, his body dies after 10 +
5d6 minutes (during which he rambles and is helpless, as
above) and his soul is forced into a demonic entity, to spend
eternity in torment.
A character who partially resists the spell must make
another saving throw after the hour is up if the sorcerer
elects to spend a further 10 Power Points on continuing the
spell. The second save is at a penalty of –1 but otherwise
has the same effects as the first. This process continues
until the sorcerer chooses not to spend any more Power
Points on the spell, the target succeeds by 10 or more or
the target fails his saving throw. The save penalty increases
by one for every hour of duration.
A target who is killed by this spell counts as having been
sacrificed by the Tormented Sacrifice feat; his hit points
and the time it took him to die determine the number of
Power Points gained by the sorcerer as usual.
Material Component: A prized possession from the target
of the spell and oils and powders worth at least 500
silver pieces.
Gelid Bones
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Touch
Target: One creature
Duration: One hour/level
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +2, lesser ill-fortune,
calm of the adept.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
The target must make an immediate Will saving throw
or be paralysed for the duration of the spell, his bones
unable to support his body.
Ill-Fortune
Power Point Cost: 4
Components: V
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye, Touch or Magical Link
Target: One creature
Duration: One month
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisite: Lesser ill-fortune.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s
saving throw
Gebal halted short in his headlong plunge, as if he had
encountered a solid barrier. His bull head toppled forward
on his breast, the sword slipped from his fingers, and
then he melted slowly to the floor. It was as if all the
bones of his frame had suddenly become flabby.
– Beyond the Black River
246
Sorcery
As with lesser ill-fortune but the enhancement penalty is
increased to –2. This is not cumulative with the effects of
greater ill-fortune or lesser ill-fortune − only the most severe
penalty applies.
Greater Ill-Fortune
Power Point Cost: 8
Components: V
Casting Time: One action
Range: Evil Eye, Touch or Magical Link
Target: One creature
Duration: One year
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +3 or higher, lesser illfortune.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
As with ill-fortune but the enhancement penalty is increased
to –4. This is not cumulative with the effects of ill-fortune
or lesser ill-fortune − only the most severe penalty applies.
Divination
Almost every sorcerer can find a use for divination.
Information and knowledge are crucial, whether as ends in
their own right or to show a path to greater power.
Astrological Prediction
(Basic Divination)
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: V, S
Casting Time: Three hours
Range: Touch
Target: Creature touched
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: No (harmless)
Prerequisite: Knowledge (arcana) 4 ranks.
Skill Check: Knowledge (arcana) (DC 11)
In the Hyborian Age, little distinction is made between
astrology and astronomy. If you know another
character’s date and hour of birth, you can use this
spell to make a somewhat cryptic prediction
about his immediate future. The subject
of the spell gains a special insight
bonus of +1 to one die roll.
An astrological prediction
will apply to some
situation within the
next week;
the Games Master will inform the subject of the situation
when it arises. This situation will typically be an encounter.
Any one time the character must make a skill check, ability
check, attack roll or saving throw during that encounter,
he may apply the insight bonus to the roll. A character
can only ever be the subject of one astrological prediction
at a time. If the sorcerer’s Knowledge (arcana) check is 20
or more greater than the DC (that is, if the roll is 31 or
higher) the insight bonus is doubled to +2.
Not This Hour
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: One round
Saving Throw: None
It is not the caster’s time to die! When this spell is cast,
the caster gains 1d6 bonus hit points per Power Point
expended. Any damage suffered during the round is taken
from those bonus hit points first. At the end of the round,
the bonus hit points vanish. Unlike most other Defensive
Blasts, Not This Hour can be cast in response to any damage
that affects the caster.
Blessing of Fate
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: V, S
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One creature
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: None (harmless)
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 4 ranks, astrological
prediction.
As part of this spell, the sorcerer must perform various
divinatory rituals, such as casting bones or drawing cards.
The spell allows the caster to intuit some danger that will
affect the target and gives the target the power to avoid it.
The spell’s effect is that the sorcerer transfers one of his
Fate Points to another creature.
Dream of Wisdom
Power Point Cost: 6
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One hour
247
Sorcery
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: Eight hours
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 10 ranks, knowledge is
power class feature, astrological prediction, visions.
The sorcerer casts this spell just before going to sleep at
night. He dreams of significant events, places or people,
depending on what he has decided the night before.
When he wakes in the morning, he may have some
sort of useful insight.
A dream of wisdom brings to the character’s mind legends
or other information concerning an important person,
place or thing. If the person or thing is at hand, or if the
character is in the place in question, then only one casting
is necessary. If the character has only information on the
person, place or thing, then 2d6 castings will be necessary
over the course of successive nights. The resulting lore is
also less complete and specific, though it often provides
enough information to help the character find the person,
place or thing, thus allowing for a better dream of wisdom
next time. If the character knows only rumours, at least
2d6 × 10 castings will be necessary over successive nights.
The resulting lore is also vague and incomplete, though it
often directs the character to more detailed information,
thus allowing for a better dream of wisdom.
When completed, the divination brings legends (if any)
about the person, place or things to the character’s mind.
These may be legends that are still current, legends that
have been forgotten or even information that has never
been generally known. If the person, place or thing is not of
legendary importance, the character gains no information.
As a rule of thumb, characters of 11th level and higher are
‘legendary,’ as are the sorts of creatures they contend with,
the major magic items they wield and the places where
they perform their key deeds.
Material Component: A feather, placed under the sorcerer’s
pillow when he goes to sleep.
Mind-Reading
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One creature
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round plus 1 round/level
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 8 ranks,
astrological prediction.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the
target’s saving throw
Unless the target succeeds at a Will saving throw, you
are able to detect its emotional state and current surface
thoughts, including its immediate intentions. This can only
affect creatures that have an Intelligence score. Creatures of
animal intelligence (Intelligence 1 or 2) will only have the
simplest thoughts and most basic of emotions.
Psychometry
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Touch
Target: One object
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes plus one
minute/level
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 5 ranks, astrological
prediction.
Skill Check: Knowledge (arcana) (DC 11)
Psychometry allows the sorcerer to determine information
about the previous owner of an object he touches. The
object may be a completely lifeless inanimate
object, a body part or fluid previously
‘owned’ by a still-living creature. Examples
of the latter include the hair of a wolf, found
caught in thorn-bush or the blood of a king,
spilled on the sand during a desperate fight
to the death.
Each round the sorcerer concentrates on the
object, he may make a Knowledge (arcana)
check to learn one piece of information,
as shown on the Psychometry
table. If he fails, he may make
‘We found the spot where the fight was fought,’ they
said. ‘Blood was on the sand. But the king was gone.’
The fourth Khitan drew imaginary symbols upon the carpet
with his staff, which glistened scalily in the lamplight.
‘Did you read naught from the sands?’ he asked.
‘Aye,’ they answered. ‘The king lives, and he has gone
southward in a ship.’
– The Hour of the Dragon
248
Sorcery
another attempt to determine the same information in the
following round instead of moving directly on to the next
piece of information.
Round Information Learned
1 Last owner’s species (human, man-ape,
jaguar and so on)
2 Last owner’s gender
3 Last owner’s land of origin (Cimmeria,
Hyrkania, the Vilayet Sea and so on)
4 Last owner’s age
5 Last owner’s current state of health
6 Last owner’s current location and heading,
if moving
7 Last owner’s name, if any
8 How the last owner came by the object
9 How the last owner lost the object
10 Whether the last owner had any Corruption
11 Previous-to-last owner’s species (human,
man-ape, jaguar and so on)
12 Previous-to-last owner’s gender
And so on And so on
Sorcerous News
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One hour
Range: 2,000 miles plus 1,000 miles/level
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes plus one
minute/level
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 12 ranks, astrological
prediction.
Skill Check: Knowledge (arcana) (see below)
Certain animals, supernatural creatures and high-level
sorcerers alike are connected by a sorcerous ‘news network’
that keeps them informed of major developments around
the world. Sorcerous news allows the sorcerer to listen in
on this network and send messages out. Sorcerous news
may only be cast during the hours of darkness.
A Knowledge (arcana) check is made.
The check result indicates the
type of news gained:
Check Result News
15 Movements of major artefacts such as
the Heart of Ahriman
20 The sudden appearance or reappearance
of a sorcerer of great power
(level 15+)
25 The death of a king
30 The plundering of an ancient tomb
The precise form and extent of the news given is always
up to the Games Master but it should usually include the
location and time-scale of any events covered.
Sending out a message with sorcerous news does not
require a check. However, the news will not carry far
unless the various messengers who pass it on regard it as
highly interesting.
Material Component: Assorted incenses and powders worth
20 silver pieces
greater Sorcerous News
Power Point Cost: 4+ points
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One hour
Range: 10,000 miles plus 2,000 miles/level
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes plus one
minute/level
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 16 ranks, astrological
prediction, sorcerous news.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
Skill Check: Knowledge (arcana), Bluff, Intimidate or
Diplomacy (see below)
This works much like sorcerous news, except as follows:
* The sorcerer gains a +2 bonus to the relevant Knowledge
(arcana) check.
* By making a magic attack roll, the sorcerer can attempt
to prevent a specific other sorcerer who has the sorcerous
news spell from hearing a particular piece of news that
night, or insert a piece of false news for that sorcerer’s
ears only. The target may make a Will saving throw
to avoid this effect, in which case he also has a chance
of discovering the attempted meddling when he uses
sorcerous news himself and makes his Knowledge
(arcana) check and beats DC 30.
249
Sorcery
* The sorcerer can extend the sorcerous news network
to carry rumours or news to ordinary people, as well
as the usual sorcerers and similar beings. For each
city to which the news is to be carried, this process
takes around one hour and costs an additional Power
Point. The sorcerer can select specific pieces of news
to deliver. This effect can be used to stir up trouble
or calm it, depending on the news spread. In this case
the sorcerer makes a Bluff, Diplomacy or Intimidate
check, as agreed by the player and the Games Master,
depending on the type of news to be spread. The DC
is set by the Games Master and is usually between 15
and 35, depending on the size and nature of the city,
the attitude the people may already have, any especial
susceptibility or resistance they may have to sorcerous
communications and any other factor determined to be
relevant by the Games Master.
Material Component: Assorted incenses and powders worth
50 silver pieces.
Visions
Power Point Cost: 2/minute
Components: S, M or F
Casting Time: One full round
Range: 1,000 miles plus 100 miles/level
Effect: Magical sensor (see below)
Duration: Power Points
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 8 ranks, astrological
prediction.
Skill Check: Knowledge (arcana), DC 10 + 1 per 100
miles distant the target is beyond the first 100 miles
You can see and hear events at any distance. This spell
produces an invisible magical ‘sensor’ that sends a moving
image back to your focus or material component, providing
you with a view of the site or person upon which you wish
to spy. This view can be very close up, as though through
a human eye, or very far away and high up so as to see
the whole of a battlefield or other wide scene, as though
through a hawk’s eye.
If desired, you may instantaneously move your magical
sensor to any other point within range, up to once per
minute.
Focus/Material Component: This spell requires a focus or
alternatively a material component. One or the other will
do; if you have a focus available, you have no need for a
material component.
The focus can take the form of a crystal ball or asilvery
mirror (see page 274).
The material component can be either a handful of
special herbs thrown onto an ordinary fire to produce
green smoke in which the visions can be seen or a dose or
two of a suitably hallucinogenic drug such as black lotus
wine (see page 275). In either case, the cost is around
100 silver pieces.
Visions of Torment
and Enlightenment
Power Point Cost: 4 for the first minute, then 1/minute
thereafter
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Touch or Evil Eye
Target: One sentient creature (Int 3+)
Duration: Power Points, up to a maximum of one minute
per level
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 12 ranks, magic attack
bonus +5, astrological prediction, visions, entrance.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
This spell enables the sorcerer to force a number of bizarre
visions upon an unsuspecting victim, propelling him
through past lives and ancestral memory in a wild mental
voyage of self-discovery. This can be a highly disturbing
experience and is often used in an attempt to either
break prisoners or test potential recruits for sorcerous
societies. Those who are overwhelmed by the spell are
permanently impaired by what they have learned, while
those who can steel themselves to learn something
from their tormented visions may achieve some
form of enlightenment.
The target is highly disoriented for the
duration of the spell, with a penalty of –4
to all attack rolls, skill checks and Defence. At
the end of the spell, he attempts a Will saving
throw. If he fails, he suffers Wisdom damage
depending on how long his visions lasted:
Duration of Spell
(Minutes)
Wisdom
Damage
1–6 1d4
7–11 1d6
12–15 1d8
16–18 1d10
19 2d6
20 2d8
250
Sorcery
If he succeeds and the spell lasted at least 10 minutes, he
instead gains a permanent +1 bonus to Wisdom.
No character can be affected by Wisdom gains or losses
from this spell more than once, though he will still be
affected by the penalties to attack rolls and the like if he is
targeted a second time.
Material Component: A dose of a suitable hallucinogenic
drug such as lotus juice (see page 275), costing around 100
silver pieces. This must somehow be administered to the
target before the spell can be cast.
Hypnotism
Hypnotism is extremely useful both as a direct means of
attack and for far more subtle purposes. Though it may
not be so quick as a hurled globe of demon-fire, it can
still provide fairly rapid effects that are significantly more
versatile than mere flaming destruction.
Hypnotism is not inherently sorcerous. Much hypnotism
is simply mesmerism, an ability to take advantage of
another’s superstitious fears and unconscious willingness
to be dominated. This type of hypnotism requires no
expenditure of Power Points but simply takes time. It is
for this reason that some scholars regard hypnotism as
beneath themselves, considering it to be no true sorcery.
However, many of the more advanced hypnotic spells do
require sorcery, such as when it comes to forcing a victim
to do one’s bidding, or affecting him at distances where
mere mesmerism would be quite unfeasible.
Entrance
(Basic Hypnotism)
Power Point Cost: None
Components: S, M or F
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One creature
Duration: Concentration
Saving Throw: Will negates
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving
throw
When you cast this spell, the
target creature must make
a Will saving throw or be
unable to take any actions
for as long as you
concentrate.
If the creature is attacked or sustains damage while
entranced, it may attempt a saving throw again to throw
off the effects of the spell. This second saving throw gets a
bonus equal to the amount of damage inflicted.
This spell can only affect a creature that has six or fewer
hit dice.
It is possible to boost the power of this spell by preparation.
For each full round in which you do nothing but stare at the
target creature before attempting to entrance it (whether or
not you have eye-to-eye contact over that time) you can
affect a creature of +2 HD and you gain a circumstance
bonus of +1 on your magic attack roll.
Note that an entranced creature is not stunned, so attackers
gain no special advantage against it.
Material Component or Focus: A shining object, such as a
small mirror, suspended from a cord
Terrible Fascination
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: Personal
Area: 10 foot radius around the sorcerer
Duration: 1d4 rounds
Saving Throw: Will negates
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the victims’ saving throw
When this spell is cast, all creatures within 10 feet of the
sorcerer must make a Will saving throw or be entranced
as if by the entrance spell. The entrancement lasts for 1D4
rounds and cannot be maintained longer than this, although
the sorcerer may use the entrance spell on one of his victims
while he is under the effect of terrible fascination.
Dance of the Cobras
Power Point Cost: 5
Components: S, M, F
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One humanoid creature
Duration: Concentration
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Perform (any musical instrument) 8 ranks,
Ritual Sacrifice, must be a worshipper of Hanuman,
entrance, telekinesis.
251
Sorcery
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throws
or Perform checks
The dance of the cobras is an extensive and elaborate but
powerful ritual sacrifice that revolves around four preprepared,
hypnotised snakes.
Four jars containing the snakes are smashed about the
target. In effect, the snakes are inside the target’s fivefoot
square, though at the very corners of it. For the first
1d6 rounds, the target must make a Reflex saving throw
each round or be bitten by one of the snakes, suffering
the usual damage and poison effects for such a bite (see
page 375). If he chooses to spend the whole of each round
just dodging snakes (similar to a Total Defence action in
combat) he gains a +4 circumstance bonus to his Reflex
saving throws. Note that the snakes do not make normal
attack rolls against the target; they are, after all, hypnotised
and even at this stage there is a strange, rhythmic quality
to their rapid, darting movements. However, if the target
attempts to leave the square, all four snakes immediately
make attacks as normal. They are assumed to have attacks
readied for just such an eventuality.
After the initial 1d6 rounds, the spell creates
unearthly music sacred to the god Hanuman
and the hypnotised snakes begin to dance. The target may
either continue to make Reflex saving throws to avoid
them, with a +2 synergy bonus if he has at least five ranks
of Perform (dance) or he may instead simply make Perform
(dance) checks at the same DC.
If the victim dies from being bitten by the snakes, whether
from direct damage or from poison, the sorcerer who cast
the spell gains a number of benefits as follows:
* Power points as though the target had been slain by
the sorcerer. One Power Point is gained for every
three of the target’s hit points, or one Power Point for
every two of the target’s hit points if the target was
a human female.
* +2 morale bonus to all attack rolls and magic attack
rolls for the next 24 hours.
If the victim somehow escapes or is rescued, the sorcerer
instead suffers a –1 morale penalty to Defence and all
saving throws for the next day.
Material Component: Four jade jars, worth at least 100
silver pieces each. With the snakes inside (see below), these
must be balanced among the rafters of the room in which
the spell is to be used or, if the sorcerer has greater telekinesis
available, concealed somewhere in the room or about the
person of the sorcerer.
Focus: Four cobras, of at least Small size. These must
somehow be placed in jars before the spell is cast.
Domination
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One humanoid who is already
affected by your entrance spell
Duration: Concentration
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +3,
entrance.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s
saving throw
The sorcerer can control the actions
of any humanoid that he has
already entranced (see opposite).
The sorcerer and his target must
share a common language
252
Sorcery
so the sorcerer can give instructions. Casting this spell ends
the effects of the entrance spell, as domination immediately
supersedes said spell. The target does not gain a saving
throw to resist the domination except as follows:
This spell can only affect a creature with 8 or fewer Hit Dice.
Targets resist this control if forced to take actions against
their nature. In this case they receive a Will saving throw
with a bonus of +1 to +2, depending on the type of action
required. Obviously self-destructive orders would be worth
a +2 bonus.
Among other uses of this spell, the sorcerer can cause the
target to fall asleep, as well as remove short-term memories
from the target (such as the memory of having seen the
sorcerer in the first place).
Once control is established, the range at which it can
be exercised is unlimited but new orders can only be
granted if the sorcerer is within shouting distance of
the target (60 feet).
Dread Serpent
Power Point Cost: 3
Components: V, S, (F)
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One humanoid; usually one who is already affected
by your entrance spell (but see below)
Duration: One round
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +4, entrance.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
This spell creates an illusionary snake or similarly dread,
poisonous creature from another object. The illusion affects
only the target, with any other observers seeing clearly that
the object remains as it really is. Dread serpent can be used
in one of two modes:
* Turn part of the target’s clothing into a serpent.
In this case, you must entrance the target before
the spell is cast. Casting this spell ends the effects
of the entrance spell, as dread serpent
immediately supersedes said spell; this
means that if the dread serpent
fails, the target is no longer
entranced either.
* Turn your own sorcerer’s staff into a serpent, which
you hurl at the target’s feet. In this case the target must
be within 20 feet of you, though you need not make
an attack roll against him. The main advantage of this
mode of the spell is that you need not have entranced
the target before casting it.
The target receives a Will saving throw. If he fails, he
perceives the serpent biting him and dies at once. If he
makes his saving throw, he perceives himself slaying the
serpent and the object reverts to its original state. In
either case, making the saving throw (and, in the target’s
perception, fighting the snake) takes one round, during
which time the target may not take any other actions and
is at –2 to Defence due to distraction.
Focus: For the second mode of operation, this spell requires
you to be carrying a staff worth at least 50 silver pieces,
though it can functionally be quite mundane. It could be
simply an ornate or decorated quarterstaff, or some kind of
magical staff if you are willing to fling said staff at the feet
of an enemy.
Hypnotic Suggestion
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One living creature
Duration: 10 minutes plus one minute/level, or until
completed
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +2, entrance.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throws
The character influences the actions of the enchanted
creature by suggesting a course of activity, limited to a
sentence or two. The suggestion must be worded in such
a manner as to make the activity sound reasonable to the
person. In effect, it can remove the influence of either the
person’s conscious will or his unconscious desires so that he
will perform the suggested course of action that reason or
instinct might otherwise have prevented.
This spell can only affect a creature that has 12 or fewer
Hit Dice.
The suggested course of activity continues for the entire
duration of the spell. If the suggested activity can be
completed in a shorter time, the spell ends when the
subject finishes what he was asked to do. The character can
instead specify conditions that will trigger a special activity
253
Sorcery
during the duration of the spell. For example, the character
might suggest that a noble knight give his warhorse to the
first beggar he meets. If the condition is not met before the
spell expires, the activity is not performed.
A very reasonable suggestion causes the saving throw to be
made with a penalty (such as –1, –2 or such like) at the
discretion of the Games Master.
Alternatively, the caster can suggest an illusion to the
victim. This illusion cannot be damaging (dread serpent is
required for that) but he could convince the victim that a
blank scroll is actually a royal warrant or that the caster is
actually dressed in rich robes, not rags. If the caster chooses
to create an illusion, the victim’s will is not affected, just
his senses. An unreasonable illusion (say, that a horde of
barbarians has just charged into the inn) will be dismissed
instantly as false by the victim – the spell is capable
of only subtle illusions.
Mass Hypnotic
Suggestion
Power Point Cost: 8
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)
Area: All creatures in a radius of 30 ft. + 5 ft. per level
Duration: 10 minutes plus one minute/level, or until
completed
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +5, entrance, hypnotic
suggestion.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throws
As with hypnotic suggestion, except that the spell affects
all creatures of 8 Hit Dice or below who can hear the
sorcerer’s voice.
Furthermore, the sorcerer is able to magically project
his voice as though it were emanating from any point in
the spell’s range. Any creature within the area is affected,
unless they are deaf or have stopped their ears in advance.
Stopping their ears ahead of time allows opponents to avoid
having to make saving throws against sound-based spells.
Stopping one’s ears is a full-round action and requires wax
or other soundproof material to stuff into the ears.
Ranged Hypnotism
Power Point Cost: +4 points
Components: As per original spell, plus M
Casting Time: As per original spell,
plus one full round
Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft. per level) or Magical Link
Target: As per original spell
Duration: As per original spell
Saving Throw: As per original spell
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +5, entrance, hypnotic
suggestion.
Magic Attack Roll: As per original spell
A hypnotist of sufficient power can expend a vast amount of
energy to hypnotise someone at a distance. The victim must
either be within line of sight, or connected to the sorcerer via
a magical link (see page 237). Any of the standard hypnotism
spells can be made ranged with this spell.
The components are as for the original spell, except as
follows:
Material Component: In addition to any material
components required by the original spell, ranged
hypnotism requires various herbal powders to a total cost
of 100 silver pieces.
Savage Beast
Power Point Cost: 4
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One living creature, plus see below
Duration: One round/level, plus see below
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +3, entrance, hypnotic
suggestion.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving
throws
This spell turns an ordinary animal into a
ravening and berserk monster, very difficult to
kill and very dangerous to fight. The creature
resembles a rabid animal when affected by
the spell. This spell can only affect a creature
that has 16 or fewer Hit Dice.
The target is affected as though it was in a
state of fighting-madness, as if it had the
Fighting-Madness feat (see page 126).
The target also gains the benefits of
the Diehard feat.
The sorcerer can specify an enemy
or group of enemies within the
target’s line of sight. The creature
will move as rapidly as
254
Sorcery
possible towards them and attack them ferociously. If no
enemy or enemies are specified, it will simply attack the
closest living creature to it.
In addition, the target’s bite attack, if any, has the side effect
of ‘transmitting’ the spell to any creature damaged by the
bite. This acts in every way as though the creature damaged
had the spell cast on it by the same sorcerer that cast it on
the original target, though this creature is not affected until
2d10 rounds after being bitten.
Nature Magic
Nature magic affects or summons plants and animals.
It is commonly found among witches, wise women and
shamans, since it is relatively simple to learn and highly
effective in the wilderness or rural environments favoured
by such scholars.
Summon Beast
(Basic Nature Magic)
Power Point Cost: 1+
Components: V, S, F, XP
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: One mile/level
Target: One animal that can be found in the local
environment
Duration: One minute/level, plus see below
Saving Throw: Will partial (see below)
Prerequisite: Knowledge (nature) 4 ranks.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
This spell summons a creature of the animal subtype, up to
Medium-size, to serve the sorcerer. The Power Point cost
is one for an animal of Small size or smaller and two for a
Medium-size animal.
The sorcerer may specify the animal he wishes to summon.
If that animal is not found within one mile, he may specify
an alternate animal but this will take another action and
require a different focus (see below). He may keep
specifying alternate animals until he finds one that
is within a mile. The Power Point cost is always
paid for the animal that is actually summoned,
regardless of whether that animal is the
sorcerer’s first choice.
The animal will serve the
sorcerer without question,
including by attacking his enemies. However, summoned
creatures may become uncontrolled if they sustain damage.
At the end of any round during which a summoned
creature is dealt damage, it must make a Will saving throw
(DC = 10 + damage sustained that round). Failure indicates
that the creature’s pain overcomes its desire to serve the
sorcerer and it flees from the damage-dealing source
as rapidly as possible.
For some reason, any animal summoned by a Pictish
sorcerer has a pale, almost ghostly appearance. This has no
particular game effect but simply appears to be a peculiarity
of the Pictish style of sorcery.
Focus: A small image or carving of the animal to be
summoned. This can be re-used on a later occasion.
Experience Point cost: 25 XP (50 XP for a Medium-size
creature).
Greater Summon Beast
Power Point Cost: 4+
Components: V, S, F, XP
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: One mile/level
Target: One animal that can be found in the local
environment
Duration: One minute/level, plus see below
Saving Throw: Will partial
Prerequisites: Knowledge (nature) 5 ranks, summon beast.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
As for summon beast, except that an animal of up to Huge
size can be summoned. The Power Point cost is four points
for a Large creature, or eight points for a Huge creature.
Experience point cost: 100 XP (200 XP for a Huge
creature)
Animal Intercessor
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: One mile/level
Target: One animal that can be found in the local
environment
Duration: One round
Saving Throw: None
255
Sorcery
This spell summons an animal from nearby, which arrives
instantly to defend the caster from an attacker. The animal
immediately makes a Reflex save against the attacker’s
Attack Roll. If the saving throw is successful, the animal
places itself between the blow and the sorcerer and takes
the damage instead. Regardless of whether or not the
animal is struck, it makes one charge attack against the
attacker before leaving.
If the caster expends fewer than four Power Points, he
summons a Medium creature. If the caster expends between
four and eight Power Points, he summons a Large creature.
If the caster expends more than eight Power Points, he
summons a Huge creature. The animal will make one
attack on the caster’s foe, then leave unless it is attacked
again. The animal comes thundering out of the jungle
or swooping out of the sky to protect the sorcerer for an
instant; then it leaves.
If the animal is large enough to carry or be ridden by the
sorcerer, he may make a Reflex save (DC 15) to mount the
animal as it leaves.
Animal Ally
Power Point Cost: 6
Components: V, S, M, XP
Casting Time: One day
Range: One mile/level
Target: One animal that can be found in the local
environment
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Knowledge (nature) 6 ranks, summon beast.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving throw
The sorcerer gains an animal ally selected from the following
list: badger, camel, dog, war dog, eagle, hawk, horse (any),
owl, scorpion, snake (any of Medium size or smaller) or
wolf. This animal is a loyal companion that accompanies
the sorcerer on his adventures as appropriate for its kind.
A 1st level caster’s ally is completely typical for its kind
except as noted below. As a scholar advances in level, the
animal’s power increases as shown on the table.
If this spell is cast while the sorcerer already has an animal
ally acquired by use of animal ally, the previous ally, if still
alive, is released from service.
A sorcerer of 6th level or higher may select from alternative
lists of animals (see below). Should he select an
animal ally from one of these alternative lists,
the creature gains abilities as if the character’s level were
lower than it actually is. Subtract the value indicated in the
appropriate list from the character’s level and compare the
result with the level entry on the table to determine the
animal ally’s powers. If this adjustment would reduce the
scholar’s effective level to zero or lower, he cannot have that
animal as an ally.
An animal ally is different from a normal animal of its
kind in many ways. The ally is treated as a magical beast,
not an animal, though it retains an animal’s HD, base
attack bonus, saving throws, Skill Points and feats. It is
superior to a normal animal of its kind and has special
powers, as described below:
Animal Ally Basics: Use the base statistics for a creature of
the ally’s kind but make the following changes:
Class Level: The character’s level.
Bonus HD: Extra eight-sided (d8) Hit Dice, each of which
gains a Constitution modifier as normal. Remember
that extra Hit Dice improve the animal ally’s base attack,
dodge and saving throw bonuses. An animal ally has good
Fortitude, Will and Reflex saving throws; treat it as a
character whose level equals the animal’s HD. It gains +1
base attack bonus per Hit Die and +1 base dodge bonus for
every two Hit Dice. An animal ally gains additional Skill
Points and feats for bonus HD as normal for advancing a
monster’s Hit Dice.
Natural DR Adj.: The number noted here is an
improvement to the animal ally’s existing natural damage
reduction.
Str/Dex Adj.: Add this value to the animal ally’s Strength
and Dexterity scores.
Bonus Tricks: The value given in this column is the
total number of ‘bonus’ tricks that the animal knows in
addition to any that the sorcerer might choose to teach
it (see page 104). These bonus tricks do not
require any training time or Handle Animal
checks and they do not count against the
normal number of tricks known by the
animal. The sorcerer selects these bonus
tricks; once selected, they cannot be changed.
Link: A sorcerer can handle his animal ally
as a free action or push it as a move action,
even if he does not have any ranks in the
Handle Animal skill. The sorcerer gains
a +4 circumstance bonus on all Ride and
Handle Animal checks made regarding
an animal ally.
256
Sorcery
Evasion: If an animal ally is subjected to an attack that
normally allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, it
takes no damage if it makes a successful saving throw.
Devotion: An animal ally gains a +4 morale bonus on Will
saving throws against hypnotism spells and effects.
Multiattack: An animal ally gains Multiattack as a bonus
feat if it has three or more natural attacks and does not
already have that feat. If it does not have the requisite three
or more natural attacks, the animal ally instead gains a
second attack with its primary natural weapon, albeit at
a –5 penalty.
Improved Evasion: When subjected to an attack that
normally allows a Reflex saving throw for half damage, an
animal ally takes no damage if it makes a successful saving
throw and only half damage if the saving throw fails.
Alternative Animal Allies: A scholar of
sufficiently high level can select his animal ally
from one of the following lists, applying the
indicated adjustment to his level (in
parentheses) for purposes of
determining the ally’s
characteristics and
special abilities.
6th Level or Higher
(Level –3)
Aurochs
Ape
Boar
Panther
Monitor Lizard
Snake, Large Viper
12th Level or Higher
(Level –9)
Ghost Snake
Lesser Son of Set
9th Level or Higher
(Level –6)
Bear
Lion
Rhinoceros
Sabre-Tooth
Snake, Huge Viper
15th Level or Higher
(Level –12)
Elephant
Animal Allies
Sorcerer
Level
Bonus
HD
Natural
DR Adj.
Str/Dex
Adj.
Bonus
Tricks
Special
3rd–5th +2 +1 +1 1 Link
6th–8th +4 +2 +2 2 Evasion
9th–11th +6 +3 +3 3 Devotion
12th–14th +8 +4 +4 4 Multiattack
15th–17th +10 +5 +5 5
18th–20th +12 +6 +6 6 Improved
Evasion
257
Sorcery
Material Component: A small image or carving of the
animal to be allied with, plus 100 silver pieces worth of
incense and herbs.
Experience Point cost: 150 XP
Children of the Night
Power Point Cost: 1/raven
Components: V, S, F
Casting Time: One full round
Range: One mile/level
Target: One creature whose name or description is known
to you, or to whom you have a magical link
Duration: One hour/level
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Knowledge (nature) 8 ranks, summon beast.
Children of the night is designed as a tracking spell. It
conjures up a semi-corporeal, supernatural raven to hover
directly above the target’s location, loudly squawking and
drawing attention to him.
If the target is more than a mile away from the sorcerer,
further raven-things appear and hover in the air directly
between the sorcerer and the first raven at intervals of one
mile. Each raven beyond the first costs an additional Power
Point but appears automatically without the sorcerer
needing to recast the spell or take any other action. The
sorcerer can end the spell at any time rather than spend the
extra Power Point needed to produce another raven.
The ravens always hover some 500 feet up, so as to be
highly visible to the sorcerer but difficult to shoot down
with ranged weapons; assume range increments for all
weapons are halved when shooting directly upwards. The
ravens have a Dodge Defence of 14 and have one hit point
each but any raven that is slain is immediately replaced,
at a cost of one Power Point as usual. It is possible for a
target to end this spell by shooting down ravens but only
by causing the sorcerer to run out of Power Points or by
shooting down so many ravens that he chooses to end the
spell anyway.
The target must be known to the sorcerer either by name
or description, so there is some way for the magic of the
spell to find him. Alternatively, a magical link to the target
(see page 237) will do just as well.
Focus: A small image or carving of a raven. This can be reused
on a later occasion.
Sorcerous Garden
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One action
Range: See below
Area: See below
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Craft (herbalism) 12 ranks, Knowledge
(nature) 10 ranks, summon beast.
This spell enables the sorcerer to cultivate magical
plant creatures or to grow a number of more ordinary
plants rapidly. It has different effects depending on the
version chosen.
Overgrowth: This effect causes normal vegetation (grasses,
briars, bushes, creepers, thistles, trees, vines) within long
range (400 feet + 40 feet per level) to become thick and
overgrown. The plants entwine to form a thicket or jungle
that creatures must hack or force a way through. Speed
drops to 5 feet, or 10 feet for Large or larger creatures.
The area must have brush and trees in it for this spell
to take effect.
You may designate places within the area that are not
affected.
Enrichment: This effect targets plants within a range of
one-half mile, raising their potential productivity over
the course of the next year to one-third above normal.
Magical Plant: This effect allows you to grow one
or more plant creatures from seed or seedlings to
full adult size rapidly. You can cause them to grow
to a total size of up to one Hit Die per caster level.
For example, a 15th level scholar could grow
a single 15 HD yothga, or fifteen 1 HD
black lotus blossoms. Each plant grows at
a speed of one HD per round. Thus, in the
above example the yothga would take fifteen
rounds to reach its full 15 HD size but the
black lotus blossoms would all grow to full
one HD size within one round.
Material Component: Various special
fertilisers and plant foods costing at least
40 silver pieces.
258
Sorcery
Spirit of the Land
Power Point Cost: 4
Components: V, S
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 10 miles/level
Duration: 10 minutes/level
Prerequisites: Knowledge (nature) 5 ranks, summon beast.
By means of this spell, the caster projects his mind into
the land around him. If in a forest, he becomes the trees
and the small animals and the vermin. If in a desert, he
becomes the sandstorm and the circling vultures. The
caster can perceive what animals are within the area of
effect; he can also dimly sense the presence of men but
cannot see who they are or learn much more than their
race and rough numbers. The caster also becomes aware of
large-scale events, changes or unusual things like a forest
fire, a raging battle or the location of a large structure like
a castle in the depths of the forest.
While this spell is in effect the sorcerer’s body is comatose
and helpless as his mind wanders the land all around. He is
aware of its location and if it suffers harm, but no more. He
may return his mind to his body as an immediate action
at any time.
Command Weather
Power Point Cost: 8
Components: V, S
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 10 miles/level
Duration: 1d4 hours
Prerequisites: Knowledge (nature) 10 ranks, spirit of the
land.
This spell allows the caster to control the weather in the
surrounding area. He can summon up snowstorms or
howling winds, quell the raging seas or pour so much rain
into a river that it bursts its banks and floods a town.
The caster cannot call up any weather that is outside the
possible range for a region in the current season; for
example, he cannot create a snowstorm in the desert
or at the height of summer.
Necromancy
The scholar who learns necromancy achieves limited
mastery over the very mysteries of life and death.
This is especially popular for those who wish to slay
their enemies outright, rather than merely harming or
inconveniencing them.
Raise Corpse
(Basic Necromancy)
Power Point Cost: 1/corpse
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft. per two levels)
Target: Up to one corpse/level
Duration: Concentration + 1d6 rounds
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisite: Magic attack bonus +2.
This spell turns the bodies of dead creatures into undead
zombies that follow the sorcerer’s spoken commands. The
zombies can follow the sorcerer, remain in an area and
attack any creature (or just a specific type of creature) that
enters the place or perform simple actions according to
the sorcerer’s commands. The zombies remain animated
until they are destroyed. A destroyed zombie may
not be animated again.
The zombies the sorcerer creates remain under his control
for the duration of the spell. At the expiry of the spell, they
become simple corpses once more, falling in lifeless heaps
wherever they stand.
A zombie can be created only from the mostly intact corpse
of a humanoid or animal and its statistics depend more
upon the corpse it was created from than any abilities it
had in life. See page 387 for details on the risen dead.
Afari shuddered visibly.
‘How can a common man lie to that black devil? His
eyes are like coals of red fire that look into depths
unnameable. I have seen him make corpses rise and walk,
and skulls champ and grind their naked jaws.’
– The Snout in the Dark
259
Sorcery
Chill of the Grave
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: Personal
Area: 10 foot radius around the sorcerer
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Fortitude half
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the victims’ saving throw
All those within 10 feet of the sorcerer take 1d6 cold
damage for every Power Point expended in the casting of
this spell. A successful Fortitude save (DC = the result of
the sorcerer’s magic attack roll) means the victim takes half
damage. The sorcerer himself is immune to the defensive
blast, as are zombies and other undead creatures.
The Dead Speak
Power Point Cost: 1/corpse
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Touch
Target: One corpse
Duration: Concentration + 1d6 rounds
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Scholar level 4, raise corpse.
The necromancer forces a semblance of life back into a
corpse or at least a head. The animated horror can speak
and think and see as it did in life, assuming it still has
the necessary body parts to do so (a severed head can still
speak if it has a tongue and jaw and see if it has eyes). The
spark of life lasts only a few moments but this may be long
enough to interrogate a fallen guard or mock a defeated foe
one last time.
Agonising Doom
Power Point Cost: 4/target
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft. per two levels)
Target: One or more creatures, up to a maximum of one
creature/two levels
Duration: 1d6 rounds
Saving Throw: Fort negates and see below
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +6, raise corpse,
death touch.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the targets’ saving
throws
Black tendrils of power shoot out from the sorcerer’s
hands, slaying his enemies agonisingly and rapidly. This
spell only affects creatures with fewer than 8 HD.
The targets must all make Fortitude saving throws,
with success completely negating the effects of the
spell. A character who fails his saving throw begins to
lose 4d6 hit points per round. Furthermore, he
is in such extreme pain that he must make a
Will saving throw on any round in which
he wishes to act. Success means he may take
either a move action or a standard action but
not both; failure means he may not do anything
that round other than lie prone in agony.
Black Plague
Power Point Cost: 20
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One day
Range: One mile per level
Area: One mile radius per level,
or 10 foot radius per level; see
below
260
Sorcery
Duration: One week/level
Saving Throw: Fortitude negates
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +7, raise corpse.
This is a dreadful spell capable of driving hundreds or
even thousands of victims to horrible, tormented deaths.
It creates a great wind propelling a foul, stinking miasma
which can strike down all within its path. The effects of
this spell closely resemble a disease, though in fact sorcery
is responsible for the victims’ demise.
The black plague has two different forms: one is designed
to strike terror into a population, the other is designed to
wipe out the sorcerer’s enemies wholesale.
In either case, once the plague strikes, it is rapid and lethal
from its onset to the victims’ death a few minutes later.
A Fortitude saving throw (DC 17) must be made. Failure
causes the targets 1d4 Constitution damage and turns their
bodies purple. After 3d6 minutes they take another 1d4
Con damage and their bodies turn black. From that point
onwards, they are dealt a further 1d4 Con damage per
minute until they are dead.
The first form of black plague affects a random scattering of
individual humans throughout the area of its effect (which
is one mile radius per level) at a rate of one per the sorcerer’s
level per day. The sorcerer may not specify which individuals
are affected in this way. This form of black plague tends
to significantly demoralise the population through which
it is sweeping, for they can see no comprehensible reason
for its spread. This is likely to have a number of effects
at the Games Master’s discretion, including disruption to
the area’s economy, widespread looting or other lawlessness
and an unwillingness among the population to become
involved with other issues (such as fighting a war) until the
problem of the plague is resolved.
A further side-effect of this form is that it gives the sorcerer
a +4 bonus on any Bluff, Diplomacy or Intimidate checks
he makes to deliver news by the greater sorcerous news
spell (see page 248), so long as he can plausibly tie
in the effects of the plague with the message he is
attempting to communicate. This will usually
be most effective if he is able to present the
plague as a divine punishment or
warning of some kind.
The devastation that this
form of black plague
inflicts on the
community is
further heightened by the scorching, blasting effects of
the wind that drives the disease-ridden miasma. This
wind blasts corn in the fields and fruit in the trees alike,
withering plants and slaying animals. The precise effects
of this on crop plants are up to the Games Master but if
nothing else all creatures of the animal subtype within the
area of effect must make Fortitude saving throws just as
the small number of humans did, or die themselves. In
the often shaky economies of many Hyborian nations,
such loss of food crops and animals can weaken or
destroy entire communities even more effectively than the
direct effects of the plague.
The second form of the spell is much more extreme in its
devastation of humans but affects only a small area and
has no effect on animals or plants. All humans within the
specified area (a 10 foot radius per level of the sorcerer) must
make Fortitude saving throws (DC 17) or die as above. A
successful saving throw protects them for a week, but if
they re-enter the area after that they must save again.
Furthermore, with this version of the spell, the sorcerer
may concentrate to move the area of effect at a speed of
up to four miles per hour. This requires almost all the
sorcerer’s attention, as is usual for a concentration type
effect; also, Concentration checks may need to be made
if he is attacked or otherwise distracted while moving the
area of effect.
Note that the plague is not actually contagious in either
version.
The plague will last for the entire duration of the spell.
The only way for the sorcerer or anyone else to end it
prematurely is by somehow taking control of the weather
in the area and sweeping away the miasma with a great
storm. Unlike with true diseases, conventional physicians
using the Heal skill cannot alleviate the plague, though
certain spells and magical objects may be useful for this.
Material Component: Essences collected from certain tombs
in Stygia, to a value of 1,500 silver pieces.
Greater Black Plague
Power Point Cost: 15
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One hour
Range: Magical Link
Target: Up to one creature per three levels
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Fortitude negates
261
Sorcery
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +8, black plague, raise
corpse.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the targets’ saving throws
This enhancement to black plague allows the sorcerer
to target specific individuals, making it an ideal tool for
magical assassination. It can only be cast while a standard
black plague cast by the sorcerer is already in operation
and can only affect targets within that spell’s area of effect.
Those targets must immediately make Fortitude saving
throws as usual for black plague, except that the DC is set
by the sorcerer’s magic attack roll. These saving throws
are in addition to any saving throws the victims may have
already had to make for the black plague spell.
Death Touch
Power Point Cost: 2/touch
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Touch
Target: One or more creatures touched, up to a maximum
of one creature/level
Duration: One round/level
Saving Throw: Fortitude partial
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +5, raise corpse.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the targets’ saving throws
Any creature touched by a sorcerer’s unarmed touch attack
while death touch is active die instantly. A target is
entitled to attempt a Fortitude saving throw to
resist the effect. If successful, he is instead stunned for one
round. A stunned character may not act, nor may he use
Dodge Defence or Parry Defence. Attackers get a +2 bonus
on attack rolls against a stunned opponent.
Each sorcerer or sect has its own variant of this spell,
differing only in the details. For example, the version used
by the Priests of Set causes the sorcerer’s hand to turn
completely black and is known as the Black Hand of Set.
Anyone slain with it has a black handprint burned on to his
body with a cold, deathly fire. By contrast, Khitan sorcerers
(who often wield a Staff of Death to deliver their death
touches) turn the whole of an enemy corpse completely
black when using this spell. The Games Master and players
are encouraged to devise their own ‘signature’ effects when
casting death touch.
Draw Forth the Heart
Power Point Cost: 7
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Evil Eye
Target: One creature
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Fortitude partial
Prerequisites: Ritual Sacrifice, Opportunistic Sacrifice,
Tormented Sacrifice, magic attack bonus +7, raise corpse,
death touch, agonising doom, conjuring, telekinesis.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the target’s saving
throw
This powerful spell can both dispose of an enemy and
allow the sorcerer to recoup some or all of the Power
Points used to cast it, with perhaps a few more besides
if the victim was sufficiently tough.
If the target fails his saving throw, he dies, his
heart pulled out of his body and into your
hands by a magical force. The process is so
painful to him that although he dies within
moments, you immediately gain Power Points
as though you had sacrificed him with the
Tormented Sacrifice feat after torturing him
for fifteen minutes.
A target who makes his saving throw
suffers an effect similar to a mild heart
attack and is dealt 4d6 damage.
He may only perform either a
move action or standard action on
his next turn.
262
Sorcery
Oriental Magic
Oriental magic is most commonly found in Khitai,
Vendhya and the Himelias, though oriental sorcerers do
travel the world like all their kind.
Generally, the Games Master should not overly restrict
characters from non-oriental cultures from selecting
Oriental Magic as a sorcery style, though in most cases
they will need to learn it from another adept or demon or
be a member of one of the oriental religions such as Asura,
rather than research it independently. A character who does
research it independently will likely need to travel to Khitai
or similarly far afield to do so.
Calm of the Adept
(Basic Oriental Magic)
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S
Casting Time: Three hours
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: 24 hours
Prerequisite: Wis 13.
By spending much of each morning in meditation, you are
able to significantly enhance your mind, body and spirit
for the remainder of the day. You gain a +2 enhancement
bonus to Dexterity, Wisdom and Charisma for the duration
of the spell. Furthermore, you gain a +2 bonus on any Will
saves made to resist spells of the Hypnotism school or
similar mesmeric effects.
Vanish (Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: One round
Saving Throw: None
Roll 1d6 for every Power Point expended when
this spell is cast. If the total is greater
than the damage inflicted by the
attack which provoked the
defensive blast, the sorcerer
takes no damage. Instead,
the sorcerer vanishes
from the
scene, leaving only his outer robes behind, which crumple
to a heap where he was standing. The sorcerer reappears in
a place chosen by the Games Master – normally a nearby
sanctum, temple or garden or other tranquil, safe place.
The sorcerer has no control over where he reappears.
Darting Serpent
Power Point Cost: 2+
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: One round/level
Prerequisites: Scholar level 3, calm of the adept.
For every two Power Points expended, you gain a +2 bonus
to your Dexterity and an additional +1 enhancement bonus
to all Initiative checks. You may expend up to two Power
Points per level. If you use this spell during combat, your
initiative score is adjusted by +1 per two Power Points you
expended from the next round onwards. When the spell
expires your initiative returns to its previous score.
Willow Dance
Power Point Cost: 2+
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: One round/level
Prerequisites: Scholar level 3, calm of the adept.
For every two Power Points expended, you may increase
your base movement by five feet and gain a +2 bonus to
Balance and Jump checks. You may expend up to two
Power Point per level.
Shape-Shifter
Power Point Cost: 10
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: 10 minutes/level
Prerequisites: Scholar level 12, calm of the adept.
This spell enables you to assume the form of any single
non-unique animal (any creature of the animal type) from
Fine to Colossal size. The assumed form cannot have more
than twice your scholar level in Hit Dice (to
a maximum of 40 HD).
263
Sorcery
Your creature type and subtype (if any) change to match
the new form. You gain the Strength, Dexterity and
Constitution scores of the new form but retain your own
Intelligence, Wisdom and Charisma scores. You gain all
the non-supernatural abilities (both attacks and qualities)
of the assumed form but lose your own ability to cast spells.
The new form does not disorient you. Parts of your body
or pieces of equipment that are separated from you do not
revert to their original forms.
While you are in your new form, you can heal up to one
hit point of damage per scholar level by spending one
minute resting.
You can become just about anything you are familiar with.
You can change form a number of times equal to your
scholar level during the spell’s duration, with each change
of form being a full-round action.
If slain, you revert to your original form, though you
remain dead.
Material Component: Assorted gems worth at least 500
silver pieces.
Warrior Trance
Power Point Cost: 6
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Personal
Target: Self
Duration: One round/level
Prerequisites: Scholar level 3, calm of the adept.
Warrior trance gives one of the sorcerer’s natural
weapons a +2 enhancement bonus to attack
and damage rolls and gives the caster a +2 dodge bonus
to Dodge Defence. The spell can affect a slam attack, fist,
bite or other natural weapon. This spell does not change an
unarmed strike’s damage from nonlethal damage to normal
damage. The dodge bonus and enhancement bonus are
increased to +3 if the sorcerer is 6th level or higher and by
another +1 each three levels thereafter.
Yimsha’s Carpet
Power Point Cost: 20
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Personal
Area: Up to one foot radius per level
Duration: One minute/level (D)
Saving Throw: Fortitude partial
Prerequisites: Scholar level 14, calm of the adept, summon
elemental.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the victims’ saving
throws
Yimsha’s carpet is a supernatural cloud of gold-veined
crimson that can transport, conceal and protect its
occupants. It may also be used as an offensive weapon
against the sorcerer’s enemies. Powered by elemental
energies, it extends outwards from the sorcerer like a vast
crimson aura.
The cloud has four effects: concealment, protection,
transport and stunning.
Concealment – the cloud grants concealment (see page
197). The sorcerer who created the cloud can see
through this concealment normally but any other
occupants of the cloud cannot. If there are more than
five feet of cloud between two occupants, the
concealment is total.
Protection – solid objects such as weapons
have difficulty penetrating the cloud from
without, giving the occupants an effective
damage reduction of 4 against any attack that
originates outside the cloud. This stacks with
other forms of damage reduction normally.
Attacks may be made out of or within the
cloud without hindrance.
Transport – by concentrating, the
sorcerer who cast the spell can
make Yimsha’s carpet fly with
perfect manoeuvrability at the
stately speed of 20 feet per
The scimitar-like beak was slashing for the Devi’s soft
neck, but Conan was quicker--a short run, a tigerish
leap, the savage thrust of a dripping knife, and the
vulture voiced a horribly human cry, pitched sideways
and went tumbling down the cliffs to the rocks and
river a thousand feet below. As it dropped, its black
wings thrashing the air, it took on the semblance, not
of a bird, but of a black-robed human body that fell,
arms in wide black sleeves thrown abroad.
– The People of the Black Circle
264
Sorcery
round. The sorcerer is automatically carried by the carpet,
and he may bring along any number of passengers that
fit entirely within its boundaries. If the sorcerer ceases
concentrating the cloud continues to hover in place and
support passengers, but moves no further.
Stunning – living things that enter the cloud must make a
Fortitude saving throw or be dealt 1d6 nonlethal damage
per two levels of the casting sorcerer and be stunned for
1d6 rounds. A stunned character may not act and cannot
use Dodge Defence or Parry Defence; attackers get a
+2 bonus on attack rolls against a stunned opponent. A
success on the saving throw halves the damage and means
the creature is only dazed, not stunned. A character may
only be affected once by each casting of Yimsha’s carpet.
The sorcerer who created the cloud may freely chose which
creatures within the area of effect are friends and which are
foes. Friends are protected, concealed and transported by
the cloud and are immune to its stunning and damaging
effects. Foes gain the effects of protection from outside
attacks and benefit from concealment while within the
cloud, but are not transported by it and must content with
its stunning and damaging effects.
The sorcerer can ‘switch on’ and ‘switch off ’ the cloud as a
free action up to once per round during its duration. While
switched off the cloud has no effects at all but any rounds it
is switched off still count towards the duration.
Material Component: Gold dust and herbal smoke-powders
to a total value of 850 silver pieces.
Prestidigitation
Prestidigitation is often one of the first sorcerous paths a
scholar learns, since it allows the production of more or less
immediate magical effects with which to impress or terrify
ordinary folk.
Conjuring (Basic
Prestidigitation)
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft. per
two levels)
Effect: See below
Duration: Concentration
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisite: Sleight of Hand 4 ranks.
This spell allows the sorcerer to do minor acts of
prestidigitation or illusion at a cost of one Power Point for
each effect. Examples include suspending objects in midair
or causing his eyes to glow red. The following effects are
all possible uses of this sorcery style:
* Telekinetically move a small, unattended object
(weighing up to five pounds), so long as it remains
within the spell’s range. The object can be moved at up
to 20 feet per round.
* Place a small object (weighing up to 10 pounds)
from your hands into midair and have it remain there
suspended, so long as you remain within the spell’s
range. Note that in this case you cannot move the
object. If you deliberately end the spell, you may spend
one round concentrating on lowering the object gently
to the ground. If your concentration is broken, the
object simply falls to the ground with a crash.
* Telekinetically guide a cloud of smoke or gas up
to 5 feet by 5 feet by 5 feet in size. This could
include a venomous gas cloud or similar herbal or
alchemical product. The smoke can be moved at up to
10 feet per round.
* Control a normal shadow up to 5 feet by 5 feet in
size as though it were a puppet, potentially altering
its shape and size as well as causing it to perform
certain actions.
* Alter your appearance in one minor way. This is not
sufficient to provide an effective disguise but if desired
you could use it to gain a +4 circumstance bonus to
Intimidate checks. Examples include growing horns,
causing your eyes to appear reptilian and similar
effects. This cannot grant you any bonuses to combat
– horns or claws, for example, do not allow you to
make any special attacks.
Conan spat savagely at the word, and Xaltotun, ignoring
his fury, took a crystal globe from a near-by table and
placed it before him. He did not support it in any way,
nor place it on anything, but it hung motionless in midair,
as solidly as if it rested on an iron pedestal.
– The Hour of the Dragon
265
Sorcery
* Open or close a container or door at a distance. The
object to be opened or closed must not be locked,
barred, jammed or any larger or heavier than a standard,
human-built door or chest.
* Colour, clean or soil objects (but not creatures) in a
one-foot cube each round. For example, the sorcerer
could turn a rose from white to red, or make a little
whirlwind to sweep dust under a rug.
* Chill, warm or fl avour one pound of nonliving material.
This could be used to make a cheap meal more palatable
or chill an expensive wine before serving.
Blast Wave
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: Personal
Area: A 10 foot radius around the sorcerer
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Reflex half
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC of the victims’ saving throws
When this spell is cast, all characters within 10 feet of
the caster are struck by an invisible wave of force. The
characters are hurled back 1d6 feet for every Power Point
expended when the spell is cast and take normal falling
damage (1d6 point of damage per 10 feet fallen). This
damage is doubled if the victims hit a wall or other barrier.
Victims are hurled straight back away from the caster. A
successful Reflex save (DC equals the caster’s magic attack
roll) means that the victims are only thrown half as far.
Burst Barrier
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft. per two levels)
Target: One door, portcullis, wall, chest or other barrier
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Scholar level 3, conjuring.
The sorcerer creates a surge of magical force, as though a
giant had shoulder-charged some barrier or other object
that for some reason merits the sorcerer’s displeasure. He
makes a Strength check as though the object had been
hit by a Huge creature (+8 size bonus to Strength
checks) with a Strength equal to the sorcerer’s
level × 5.
Note that unlike a more physical attempt to break or burst
an object, the magical force created by this spell is entirely
silent. As a useful side effect, the spell also silences any
noises that would usually caused by its action. Even if the
door falls to the ground, completely torn asunder from its
hinges, no noise will be created.
Conjure Item
Power Point Cost: 1+
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Touch
Effect: See below
Duration: 1d6 hours
Saving Throw: None
Magic Attack Roll: Sets Appraise DC
Prerequisite: Conjuring.
By means of this spell, the sorcerer can conjure up any
simple, common item that he could fit in his pocket or
bag, up to a maximum size of a one-handed weapon. The
spell costs one Power Point for tiny items like daggers or
keys; larger items like swords or helmets cost more points.
He cannot create true gold or other precious metals or
gemstones with the spell but he can make false valuables.
An Appraise roll against a DC equal to the sorcerer’s magic
attack roll can be made to identify such conjured items.
The sorcerer must be able to precisely visualise the item
he desires. When the spell expires, the item is revealed to
be what it truly is – twigs, folded paper, rusted scraps of
metal or a handful of dust given shape by sorcery.
Telekinesis
Power Point Cost: 1
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: 120 ft
Effect: One object touched
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Special (see below)
Prerequisites: Scholar level 3, Sleight of Hand
5 ranks, conjuring.
The sorcerer can hurl an object from his
hand at an opponent, expending personal
sorcerous power to do so. Objects which
can be thrown in this manner include
all the herbal and alchemical items
marked by an asterisk (*) later in
this chapter, as well as such items
as rocks, weapons and so on.
266
Sorcery
The sorcerer must make a ranged attack roll as normal
to hit his target. The main advantage of telekinesis over
simply throwing the object by hand is its increased
accuracy, particularly at range. An object can be hurled up
to 120 feet and is never affected by range penalties. Most
objects will deal either their standard weapon damage or
improvised weapon damage appropriate to their size and
composition. Herbal or alchemical items will have their
standard effects and may or may not require saving throws
depending on the item.
Greater Telekinesis
Power Point Cost: 1/object
Components: S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: 120 ft
Effect: Up to one object/level within Close range (25 ft. +
5 ft. per two levels)
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Special
Prerequisites: Scholar level 3, Bluff 6 ranks, Sleight of
Hand 6 ranks, prestidigitation, telekinesis.
This works like telekinesis, except as indicated above. Most
notably the sorcerer may throw more than one object and
he need not be touching the objects he hurls. Each object
may have a separate target if the sorcerer so wishes. The
sorcerer may also use greater telekinesis in a manner known
as ‘hidden death’.
When using hidden death, the sorcerer can affect a
maximum of two objects which must both be on the
sorcerer’s person. He may draw and throw them both as
part of the standard action taken to cast the spell, hurling
one from each hand (and at separate targets if he wishes).
If he succeeds in a Bluff check opposed by his target’s Sense
Motive check, the target loses any dodge or Dexterity
bonuses to his Dodge Defence. Otherwise, hidden death
follows all the normal rules for telekinesis attacks.
Deflection
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S
Casting Time: Immediate or one
standard action
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft.
per two levels)
Target: One attack
Duration: Instantaneous
Prerequisites: Scholar level 3, prestidigitation.
Magic Attack Roll: Becomes Parry Defence
By means of this spell, the sorcerer can deflect incoming
blows. The spell can be cast in two ways: as an immediate
action to deflect a blow aimed at the sorcerer; or as a
standard action (normally a readied action), in which case
it can be used against any blow that falls within range
regardless of target.
In either form the spell is cast after the attack roll is
compared to the target’s chosen Defence. The sorcerer’s
magic attack roll for this spell effectively functions as an
extra Parry, deflecting the blow if the magic attack roll is
higher than the attack roll.
This spell can be used to parry ranged attacks.
Summoning
Perhaps the gateway to the greatest magical power is
through summoning otherworldly entities to do one’s
bidding. Demonic pacts in particular can offer the sorcerer
almost unlimited power but only at the most dreadful
price: the corruption of his very soul.
The Summoning sorcery style is unusual in that it offers
a choice of two basic spells: master-words and signs and
demonic pact. Put simply, the essential difference between
these two spells is that master-words and signs compels a
demon to work for you and demonic pact involves making
a deal with a demon whereby you will work for it in return
for certain assistance.
Master-Words and Signs
(Basic Summoning)
Power Point Cost: 12
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One week
Range: See below
Target: One demon lord
Duration: Instantaneous
Saving Throw: Will negates
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 15 ranks, magic attack
bonus +6, must know at least four sorcery styles, must
never have cast the demonic pact spell.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC of the target’s saving throw
Master-words and signs summons up a demon lord and
forces it to instruct the sorcerer in the master-words and
signs by which almost any entity ranked
267
Sorcery
below it can be compelled. The sorcerer is able to compel
the demon lord by demonstrating his superior magical
prowess over it.
Only fairly high-powered sorcerers can learn this spell
and so most prefer the quick and easy path of a demonic
pact. Though the demon lord will not serve the sorcerer
directly, the knowledge of the master-words and signs can
be used to force other demons and similar entities to work
for the sorcerer, which is often more useful in any case.
The sorcerer gains a permanent +2 circumstance bonus to
any magic attack rolls made in connection with summon
demon, summon elemental or any other Summoning spells
or when targeting summoned creatures with other spells.
Furthermore, he may, up to once per round, use his
knowledge of master-words and signs to formulate a simple
spell based on either a single Verbal or a single Somatic
component (his choice). This is cast as a free action, costs
two Power Points and affects a single
summoned creature within Evil Eye
range. The summoned creature must
immediately make a Will saving throw
(DC set by the sorcerer’s magic attack
roll) or be instantly dismissed back to its
home.
Essentially, this spell opens the door
to (and enhances) other
summoning spells and
assists with dismissing
creatures summoned by
other scholars; it
has no special
effects other
than that.
The demon lord gains a Will saving throw to resist the
sorcerer’s summoning and remain in its hellish home. For
this purpose, its total Will saving throw bonus is assumed
to be +12. If it succeeds, the sorcerer may not cast the spell
again until his magic attack bonus has increased, which
may be by a simple level increase or some other means such
as a Charisma bonus increase.
Once you have successfully cast this spell once, you no
longer have any particular need to cast it again.
Material Component: Powders, potions, incenses and other
trappings to a total cost of 2,000 silver pieces.
Demonic Pact
(Basic Summoning)
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: One hour
Range: Effectively unlimited
Target: One demon
Duration: One hour/level or until task is fulfilled, but see
below
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisite: Knowledge (arcana) 4 ranks.
The first time a sorcerer casts this spell, he voluntarily
enters into a long-term pact with a demonic entity of
medium power. The Games Master determines the precise
nature of the demon, possibly in consultation with the
player of the sorcerer character. The demon is usually
chosen from among the types listed in Chapter 13:
A Hyborian Bestiary.
Usually the demon will know all the spells from 1d4+1
sorcery styles (not including Summoning) in
addition to greater demonic pact, summon
elemental and summon demon from the
Summoning style, though the precise
number of styles known will be dependent
on the type of demon with whom the pact
is made. The demon will teach the sorcerer
one of these spells or styles (of the sorcerer’s
choice) whenever he would normally be
eligible to learn a new spell or sorcery style;
however, the sorcerer will need to summon
the demon by casting this spell once
more. If the sorcerer waits until he
is eligible for a new spell before
casting demonic pact for the first
time, he can learn the new spell
when he summons the
268
Sorcery
demon; he does not have to re-cast demonic pact. The
duration of demonic pact will always be sufficient for the
sorcerer to learn a new spell from the demon.
Instead of learning a new spell, the sorcerer can call up
the demon by casting demonic pact and make a deal that
involves the demon performing a specific task for the
sorcerer, such as attacking an enemy or scaring a rival.
Such a task is always at the demon’s discretion; it will
not necessarily agree to the task sorcerer’s asks for, or it
may suggest an alternate task. Furthermore it will always
demand a price of some kind, usually a human sacrifice,
for performing the task. Finally, because it is a demon, it
may well attempt to twist the sorcerer’s words so that it
performs the letter but not the spirit of the task.
The demon will also help the sorcerer in a more
direct manner, by granting him a small
talisman, tattoo or brand which
he can touch as a free action
up to once per week in order to gain a +4 luck bonus on
any skill check, ability check, attack roll or magic attack roll
or to gain a +4 insight bonus to his Defence for one round.
This talisman, tattoo or brand retains its power even when
the demon is not present but it only works for the sorcerer
himself. If ever a month goes by when the sorcerer does
not either call up the demon or sacrifice a creature to it, the
power of the talisman, tattoo or brand is lost until the next
time he performs one of those actions. Worse, the demon
will consider this a breach of contract; sooner or later, he
will come for the sorcerer, to carry him off to hell…
Each time a sorcerer casts this spell, he must make a
Corruption saving throw (see page 82) or gain one
point of Corruption. The first time he casts the spell, he
automatically fails this saving throw.
A character who has already cast this spell on his own behalf
can also cast it for the benefit of another willing character.
In that case the other character gains all the benefits and
drawbacks of the spell, including the Corruption, although
the casting sorcerer also has to make a Corruption save for
casting the spell as usual.
As well as the usual effects of Corruption, the sorcerer
applies his Corruption as a circumstance penalty to
any Will saving throws he makes against the sorcery or
supernatural abilities of the demonic entity with whom
he has the pact. In addition, he applies his Corruption as
a circumstance penalty to all magic attack rolls he makes
against the demon with whom he has the pact.
Furthermore, if a sorcerer ever casts this spell for the
benefit of another willing character the demon may use
either character’s Corruption against them in this way.
Thus many sorcerers are reluctant to cast this spell on
another’s behalf, since the more people a sorcerer assists to
make their own demonic pacts, the more demons there will
be against whom his powers are weak.
No character can have a pact with more than one demon at
any one time. If ever a sorcerer with a demonic pact should
cast a greater demonic pact spell, the more powerful spell
replaces the effects of the other.
Material Component: Powders, potions, incenses and other
trappings to a total cost of 50 silver pieces.
269
Sorcery
Master, Aid Me!
(Defensive Blast)
Power Point Cost: All remaining points
Components: V
Casting Time: Immediate
Range: 10 feet
Target: One or more demons (see below)
Duration: One round per Power Point expended
Saving Throw: None
This spell can only be cast if the sorcerer has already
entered into a demonic pact. When this spell is cast, the
sorcerer’s demonic master appears instantly to defend its
pawn. The demon appears anywhere within 10 feet of the
sorcerer and acts immediately. The demon may choose to
block the attack that provoked the casting of this defensive
blast – if the demon chooses this option, it must make a
Reflex saving throw against a DC equal to the attacker’s
attack roll. If the Reflex save is successful, the demon takes
the damage from the attack instead of the sorcerer.
The demon remains for one round per Power Point
expended or until it is slain or banished, using its powers
as it sees fit.
The sorcerer automatically gains one Corruption Point
when this spell is cast.
If the sorcerer is subject to a greater demonic pact when
this spell is cast, he may use it to summon more than one
demonic minion to his side. Each Power Point that powers
the spell summons a single demon for a single round.
Greater Demonic Pact
Power Point Cost: 8
Components: V, S, M
Casting Time: Three hours
Range: Effectively unlimited
Target: One demon lord
Duration: One hour/level, or until task is fulfilled but see
below
Saving Throw: None
Prerequisites: Knowledge (arcana) 15 ranks, Ritual
Sacrifice, Tortured Sacrifice, magic attack bonus +6,
demonic pact, must know at least four sorcery styles, must
be subject to a demonic pact.
This spell works as for demonic pact, except as noted above
and below.
The demon summoned is a demon lord, rather than a
demon of medium power as for demonic pact. No game
statistics are provided for demon lords in Chapter 12: A
Hyborian Bestiary; in effect, they are more like minor
demonic gods than mere monsters.
A demon lord knows all spells and all sorcery styles.
Rather than intervening personally on behalf of the sorcerer
the demon lord summoned with greater demonic pact will
send one or more minions, which can be any of the entities
that could normally be summoned with the summon
demon spell, up to a total maximum HD equal to twice the
sorcerer’s level. It is these minions that will respond to any
casting of the spell master, aid me! as well.
The insight or luck bonus granted by its brand, tattoo or
talisman is doubled to +8.
Each time a sorcerer casts this spell, he must make
a Corruption saving throw or gain one point of
Corruption, as for demonic pact. However, he does not he
automatically fail this saving throw the first time he casts
greater demonic pact.
It is impossible for one sorcerer to have a pact with
more than one demon or demon lord at a time. The
greater demonic pact replaces the demonic pact that is the
prerequisite for the spell.
Material Component: Powders, potions, incenses and
other trappings to a total cost of 500 silver pieces plus
a virgin human female who is sacrificed to the demon
lord during the casting of the spell.
Summon Demon
Power Point Cost: 1 per HD of demon
Components: V, S, M, XP
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft. per two levels)
Effect: One demon, of maximum HD equal to
the caster’s level
Duration: One task, lasting up to one hour/
level
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Magic attack bonus +4,
master-words and signs or demonic
pact.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for
the demon’s saving throw
270
Sorcery
This spell calls up a single demon to perform a specific task
for the sorcerer. This could be as simple as ‘defend me for
the duration of the spell’ or a good deal more complex.
However, if the wording of the sorcerer’s instructions
allows for misunderstanding or wilful misinterpretation,
it is likely that the demon will follow the letter of the
agreement rather than the spirit.
As the sorcerer who casts this spell is instructing and
ordering the demon in question, he need not make a
Corruption saving throw. In effect, this does not count
as ‘making peaceful contact’ with the demon – the
sorcerer is using his own authority or that of the demon
with whom he has a pact to force the summoned demon
to co-operate, which is hardly either peaceful or in the
demon’s best interests.
The demon you are attempting to summon gains a Will
saving throw (with a DC set by the magic attack roll) to
resist the spell and remain in its own hell, or in the Outer
Dark or wherever it abides.
Material Component: A pinch of powdered sulphur, cast
into the air or onto the floor. The demon arises from
the sulphur.
Experience Point Cost: 50 XP/HD of demon.
Summon Elemental
Power Point Cost: 2 per HD of elemental
Components: F or V, M, XP
Casting Time: One full round
Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft. per two levels)
Effect: One elemental, of maximum HD equal to twice
the caster’s level
Duration: One task, lasting up to one hour/level
Saving Throw: See below
Prerequisites: Perform (song or an appropriate musical
instrument) 10 ranks, magic attack bonus +7, masterwords
and signs or greater demonic pact.
Magic Attack Roll: Sets DC for the elemental’s saving
throw
This spell calls up a single elemental to perform
a specific task for the sorcerer. This
could be as simple as ‘defend
me for the duration of the
spell’ or a good deal more
complex. In most cases,
though, the elemental will perform the task to the best
of its ability and understanding, rather than deliberately
misunderstanding as a summoned demon usually would.
The elemental is summoned up anywhere within line of
sight of the sorcerer.
The task must never be more than one single mission. For
example, an air elemental could carry the sorcerer’s servant
from Vendhya to Zembabwe but not wait around till he
finishes his business there and bring him back. A water
elemental could be summoned up to cause a river to flood,
to destroy a specific ship (or even a whole fleet of ships)
or to guard a port town and attack any black-sailed ships
that come near it for the duration of the spell. However, it
could not destroy a ship in the Western Ocean, rush over
to the Baracha Isles to destroy another ship in the harbour
at Tortage and then head to Argos to cause a storm. The
elemental, as played by the Games Master, will never
agree to any task that sounds like it is really two missions
disguised as one. An elemental will regard any single use of
one of its special attacks as a task in and of itself.
One option that always exists with elementals is to call
them up on a contingency basis. In this case, the sorcerer
casts the spell in advance, explains the task the elemental
is to be called up for and the event that will trigger it,
then dismisses the elemental again. If the triggering event
occurs within the duration of the spell, the elemental will
manifest automatically, perform the task and then leave. If
the triggering event does not occur within the duration of
the spell, the spell will be wasted and nothing will happen.
When summoned up on a contingency basis in this way,
the elemental will be unable to manifest unless the material
component is present. The focus or verbal component,
however, is only necessary when initially casting the spell.
The elemental you are attempting to summon gains a
Will saving throw (with a DC set by the magic attack roll)
to resist the spell and remain in its own strange home. If
summoned up on a contingency basis, it may only make
one Will saving throw when you call it up to begin the
initial negotiations – if the contingency later occurs, it
manifests without getting a saving throw to stay home.
Focus: A musical instrument, played by the sorcerer during
the spell’s casting time. This must be appropriate to the
elemental called: a drum for water elementals, song or pipes
for air elementals, stringed instrument for fire elementals
or horn for earth elementals. A sorcerer with 10 ranks of
Perform (song) does not need to use a separate instrument
when calling up an air elemental (only), as his voice acts as
a verbal component to replace the focus.
271
Sorcery
Material Component: A small quantity of the element to
be summoned up. This need only be a token amount: a
breath of air for an air elemental (which is usually provided
by the air that forms the sound of the song or pipe music),
a cupful of water for a water elemental, a small fire (such as
is caused by a handful of flame-powder) for a fire elemental
and at least four cubic inches of bare earth for an earth
elemental.
Experience Point Cost: 50 XP/HD of elemental.
Channel Demon
Power Point Cost: 2
Components: V, S
Casting Time: One standard action
Range: Personal
Duration: One round per caster level
Prerequisites: Demonic pact.
When this spell is cast, the sorcerer’s face contorts as his body
is temporarily infused with demonic energies! He gains a
+4 enhancement bonus to Strength and Constitution and
his damage reduction increases by +2. Furthermore, he can
use his hands as claws that deal 1d6 damage on a successful
hit; these count as weapons for the purposes of attacks. The
sorcerer automatically gains one Corruption point when
he casts this spell.